new post: comparing NEAR, Soroban, & CosmWasm SDKs (#11)
AhaLabs/ahalabs.github.io: src/pages/posts/comparing-rust-smart-contract-storage-approaches.md

Having spent most of my time in NEAR with [near-sdk-rs](https://github.com/near/near-sdk-rs), the thing that immediately jumped out was the variety of approaches to storing on-chain data. While all these smart contract platforms use a simple key-value store, the way they wrap this key-value store in their Rust smart contracts varies wildly. This post will compare the various approaches.

# Simple data

As a baseline, let's see the most common approaches to storing and incrementing a number.

## NEAR

```rust
use near_sdk::borsh::{self, BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize};
use near_sdk::near_bindgen;

#[near_bindgen]
#[derive(Default, BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize)]
pub struct Contract {
    counter: i8,
}

#[near_bindgen]
impl Contract {
    pub fn get_num(&self) -> i8 {
        self.counter
    }

    pub fn increment(&mut self) {
        self.counter += 1;
    }
}
```

If you're used to Rust, then this all looks pretty familiar. You can tell that the macros are doing all the heavy lifting.

> You need to add the `#[near_bindgen]` macro to a `struct`, which will make that struct the main data structure of the contract. This means all of its keys will be stored in the on-chain key-value store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to add the `#[near_bindgen]` macro to a `struct`, which will make that struct the main data structure of the contract. This struct is stored under the key `STATE`.
```

NEAR also makes you import some [Borsh](https://borsh.io/) stuff to explicitly declare the encoding/decoding format of the main data structure. You can [read more about this](https://raen.dev/guide/counter/intro.html#borsh) if you're unfamiliar with the specifics of encoding and decoding. But I don't know why `near-sdk-rs` makes you be explicit in this way—every contract I've ever seen encodes and decodes with Borsh.

> Anyhow, the Borsh encoding means that the actual stored key will not by `counter`, as shown in the code. It will be something much smaller, like a single byte.

Reviewer: Not really since the raw key is never used. There is a functionality to get the raw contract storage but it is limited to a contract with storage less than ~10kb which for real contracts is very easy to get to.

> Anyhow, the Borsh encoding means that the actual stored key will not by `counter`, as shown in the code. It will be something much smaller, like a single byte.

Reviewer: Looking at the context this is also not correct in this example since the counter is inside the struct of the contract which will have a key `STATE`, which then requires being deserialized from borsh to be readable.

Then you declare `#[near_bindgen]` on an implementation, `impl`, which adds functions to your main struct. All of the public (`pub`) functions in that `impl` will be exported from the contract as functions.

If you want to play with a more complete example of this, check out the [RAEN Guide](https://raen.dev/guide/counter/intro.html).

## Soroban

Soroban is still in its early days, and has the simplest and most explicit approach to accessing the underlying key-value store:

```rust
#![no_std]
use soroban_sdk::{contractimpl, symbol, Env, Symbol};

const COUNTER: Symbol = symbol!("COUNTER");

pub struct IncrementContract;

#[contractimpl]
impl IncrementContract {
    pub fn get_num(env: Env) -> i32 {
        env.data()
            .get(COUNTER) // Returns an Option (Some or None) wrapping a Result (Ok or Err).
            .unwrap_or(Ok(0)) // Unwrap the Option. If None, no value set. Default to 0.
            .unwrap() // Unwrap the Result. If Err, COUNTER is not i32. Panic.
    }

    pub fn increment(env: Env) {
        let count: i32 = env.data().get(COUNTER).unwrap_or(Ok(0)).unwrap();
        env.data().set(COUNTER, count + 1);
    }
}
```

> Soroban requires skipping the standard library (`#![no_std]`), which means you can't use [String](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/string/struct.String.html), only [slices](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-03-slices.html). It provides the `symbol!` macro to set the key that is used in storage, and the actual full `COUNTER` string will be the actual storage key.

Reviewer 2: The [symbol type](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/learn/built-in-types#symbol-symbol) is not exactly a string

> Symbols are small efficient strings up to 10 characters in length and limited to a-z A-Z 0-9 _ that are encoded into 64-bit integers.

(although there's a [discussion](https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/issues/463) on changing this)

Author: What is the key in the key-value store? Using `soroban read` makes it seem like it is `COUNTER`, but maybe it's doing a conversion?

Reviewer 3: The key is a Symbol, but the Soroban read command does some coercion of types, like a string it will convert into a Symbol.

However, a Symbol is actually a string, depending on context. Inside contracts it is an efficiently stored string, that is stored as a u64. Outside contracts it is ASCII-compatible 10 bytes.

Reviewer 3: You can use `&str` in soroban contracts if you'd like, although the use cases are unclear to me.

Reviewer 3: Also, the only reason you can't use String is because there's no allocator, but I think you could provide your own allocator and then use it. The SDK just doesn't setup an allocator for you. This is something I'd like to explore at some point, but admittedly it is down the list.

Reviewer: I've also wanted to try https://crates.io/crates/compact_str

Reviewer 3: @graydon are you still planning to explore a string type for Soroban and a constant slice type that's going to do some magic for longer values? I think yes.

Reviewer 3: Ok yeah found the issues:
- https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/issues/463
- https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/issues/584

Author: @leighmcculloch thanks for all the links! I'm wondering what the actual bytes in the key-value store would be, in this case. Like, the key, in the key-value store. `COUNTER` encoded how? UTF-8? Is it some representation of that actual set of characters, or is it condensed down to one byte or something?

Reviewer 3: > I'm wondering what the actual bytes in the key-value store would be

Symbols are stored efficiently inside a u64 (it fits into 60 bites actually) inside the Soroban contract runtime, but outside of it they're stored fully expanded and not particularly compact. Here's a rundown:

All keys and values are stored as an `ScVal`. The XDR definition for that is here: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-xdr/blob/026c9cd074bdb28ddde8ee52f2a4502d9e518a09/Stellar-contract.x#L187-L205. An `ScVal` is a discriminated union ([ref](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4506#section-4.15)) which means it can contain several different types of value, and to specify which value is being stored it first stores a 4-byte discriminant (enum) to indicate what value is inside.

If a Symbol is being stored, that means it will be an `ScVal::Symbol(ScSymbol)` in the Rust code, where an `ScSymbol` is a variable length string (byte array) with a maximum length of 10. On disk this will be stored as:

```
00 00 00 05 // ScVal's discriminant, an ScValType
00 00 00 0a // ScSymbo's length prefix, a 4 byte length, here lets say it is 10
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx  // The symbol string bytes 
00 00 // 2 byte padding, as xdr requires all types to be 4-byte aligned
```

To double check this:

```
$ echo -e -n "\x00\x00\x00\x05\x00\x00\x00\x0a\x68\x65\x6c\x6c\x6f\x20\x77\x72\x6c\x64\x00\x00" > val.xdr

$ xxd val.xdr
00000000: 0000 0005 0000 000a 6865 6c6c 6f20 7772  ........hello wr
00000010: 6c64 0000                                ld..

$ cargo install --locked stellar-xdr --features cli

$ stellar-xdr +next decode --type ScVal --input single val.xdr
{"symbol":"hello wrld"}
```

Author: Thanks for all the info, @leighmcculloch! Here's my proposed rewrite of the paragraph in question; how's it sound?

```suggestion
Soroban requires skipping the standard library (`#![no_std]`), which means you can't use [String](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/string/struct.String.html), only [slices](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-03-slices.html). The [`symbol!` macro](https://docs.rs/soroban-sdk/0.3.1/soroban_sdk/macro.symbol.html) handles converting user-provided, ASCII-compatible strings of max-length 10 into an efficient 64-bit runtime [value type](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/learn/environment-concepts#values-and-types). When persisted to the underlying key-value store, this `COUNTER` symbol gets encoded with [XDR](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4506), which includes one byte each for the letters in `COUNTER`, plus some [extra encoding information](https://github.com/AhaLabs/ahalabs.github.io/pull/11/files#r1039065050) so that every key in the key-value store ends up using 20 bytes.
```

And, aside from all this, CosmWasm also encourages many more conventions around smart contract authoring. If you start with the [recommended template](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cw-template), you'll end up with more than five files instead of just `src/lib.rs`, splitting your contract logic into _state_, _messages_, _errors_, and then the actual contract logic.

For the sake of side-by-side comparison, I've [consolidated all of this into one file](https://github.com/AhaLabs/cosmwasm-single-file).

Without further ado, here it is, the "simple" CosmWasm incrementer:

```rust
use cosmwasm_schema::{cw_serde, QueryResponses};
use cosmwasm_std::{
    entry_point, to_binary, Binary, Deps, DepsMut, Env, MessageInfo, Response, StdError, StdResult,
};
use cw_storage_plus::Item;
use schemars::JsonSchema;
use serde::{Deserialize, Serialize};
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Clone, Debug, PartialEq, Eq, JsonSchema)]
pub struct State {
    pub count: i8,
}

pub const STATE: Item<State> = Item::new("state");

#[cw_serde]
pub struct InstantiateMsg {

>     pub count: i8,

Reviewer: Do you need to include data here at all? Then `derive(Default)` `State` and then 
```rust
    let state = State { count: msg.count };
```
becomes

```
    let state = State::default();
```

Author: Yeah, in this case, you could definitely do that. I'm not sure if I should update the post, though, since what I did here is the closest to what most CosmWasm contracts seem to use.

Author: I think you meant that `let state = State::default();` would happen _in_ `initialize`, yes? In which case CosmWasm is still a little bit different than NEAR/Soroban, since NEAR/Soroban allow having "no data stored until it's mutated" behavior. 

I don't think there's a way to avoid setting `STATE` within `INITIALIZE`, or at least none of the examples I've seen have pushed this as an option.

Avoiding the `msg.count` parameter to `initialize` seems like a smaller point.

### Initialization

Unlike NEAR and Soroban, every CosmWasm contract needs to be initialized before it can be called. Here's all the stuff from above that's just there to deal with initialization:

```rust
#[cw_serde]
pub struct InstantiateMsg {
    pub count: i8,
}

#[entry_point]
pub fn instantiate(
    deps: DepsMut,
    _env: Env,
    _info: MessageInfo,
    msg: InstantiateMsg,
) -> Result<Response, ContractError> {
    let state = State { count: msg.count };
    STATE.save(deps.storage, &state)?;
    Ok(Response::new())
}
```

You probably noticed this `cw_serde` macro on all the structs and enums. It works together with a [`cargo schema` alias](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cw-template/blob/main/.cargo/config) and [accompanying embedded package](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cw-template/blob/231956d54770137fc0c5147f0128c9afd572eaf1/src/bin/schema.rs#L1) to generate JSON schemas for all your contract calls. These work like Ethereum's ABIs (or, you know, [like RAEN](https://youtu.be/VenoNgWdvw0) for NEAR 😏).

Anyhow, the interesting part is that it **needs** to be initialized. Why?

Because a given set of Wasm bytes is **only deployed once**, in CosmWasm.

> Let me say that again; it's super cool.

Reviewer 2: Cool indeed! So cool that we're also doing this [in Soroban](https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/pull/572)  :)  

Hopefully to be released tomorrow and will hit the sdk and examples by end-of-week

Reviewer: Very exciting!

So this demo contract seems a little more complicated than the NEAR and Soroban versions, because you need to explicitly initialize the contract, setting the `counter` to `0` while you do so. NEAR and Soroban let you default `counter` to `0`, rather than explicitly setting it. But they also both require duplicating contract bytes on-chain over and over. Score one for CosmWasm, imho.

### Errors

One last thing to get out of the way we focus in on storage manipulation.

The CosmWasm template comes with a bunch of error handling stuff. Most notably:

```rust
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
pub enum ContractError {
    #[error("{0}")]
    Std(#[from] StdError),
}
```

You can add your own errors to this enum, and include user-facing messages using [thiserror](https://docs.rs/thiserror/1.0.21/thiserror/).

Then it gets returned throughout calls to the contract in all those `Result`s. For example:

```rust
pub fn execute(…) -> Result<Response, ContractError> {…}
```

> This is another area where it kinda seems like CosmWasm requires a lot of ceremony, but it's actually just establishing firm conventions (and great usability) for something that all realistic contracts will need. Once you get your bearings, Soroban encourages a [similar approach to CosmWasm](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/examples/errors), but less baked-in. And NEAR doesn't have any conventions around this; most people [use the `require!` macro](https://docs.near.org/sdk/rust/best-practices) and throw user-facing messages right in the contract logic. Maybe that's fine?

Reviewer: > Maybe it's fine?

It means that consumers of the contract call won't know what possible errors could happen or which ones did. It's been fine, but having more structured errors with a known set is a big win for automating generating exceptions in JS, etc.

Author: How's this sound, @willemneal?

```suggestion
This is another area where it kinda seems like CosmWasm requires a lot of ceremony, but it's actually just establishing firm conventions (and great usability) for something that all realistic contracts will need. Once you get your bearings, Soroban encourages a [similar approach to CosmWasm](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/examples/errors), but less baked-in. And NEAR doesn't have any conventions around this; most people [use the `require!` macro](https://docs.near.org/sdk/rust/best-practices) and throw user-facing messages right in the contract logic. This has worked alright to a point, but makes it hard for consumers of NEAR contracts and builders of NEAR tooling to know what possible errors a contract can throw.
```

Reviewer: Yep!

### Getting and setting state!

Finally what we came here to see!

Here's how you define the shape of the state you're going to store:

```rust
use schemars::JsonSchema;
use cw_storage_plus::Item;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Clone, Debug, PartialEq, Eq, JsonSchema)]
pub struct State {
    pub count: i8,
}

pub const STATE: Item<State> = Item::new("state");
```

With a simple `State` struct like this, CosmWasm looks pretty similar to near-sdk-rs. Reminder of what that looked like:

```rust
use near_sdk::borsh::{self, BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize};
use near_sdk::near_bindgen;

#[near_bindgen]
#[derive(Default, BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize)]
pub struct Contract {
    counter: i8,
}
```

> A powerful thing about CosmWasm, though, is that you can store multiple top-level `Item`s. In NEAR, if you want to add more state, you add more keys to that `Contract` struct. This means that any function in NEAR that accesses state needs to pay the gas cost to deserialize the whole object, even if it doesn't use some keys.

Reviewer: lol or use `riff`s!

Author: Do we have a good landing page / README for Riffs yet?

# Complex data

Now that we know our way around these different SDKs, let's do a quick side-by-side for how to store more realistic data. We'll look at how each network's standard Fungible Token contract stores its set of tokens. These will be simplified code samples to show the core storage operations.

## NEAR

`near-sdk-rs` provides [collections](https://docs.rs/near-sdk/latest/near_sdk/collections/index.html) and, more recently, [store](https://docs.rs/near-sdk/latest/near_sdk/store/index.html) modules with efficient data structures to store large sets of data in the key-value store. Most code in the wild, including [the example fungible token example](https://github.com/near/near-sdk-rs/tree/master/examples/fungible-token), still use `collections`.

```rust
use near_sdk::collections::LookupMap;

// this comes from the standards library:
#[derive(BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize)]
pub struct FungibleToken {
    /// AccountID -> Account balance.
    pub accounts: LookupMap<AccountId, Balance>,
}

// then, in your contract, this is your main struct:
#[near_bindgen]
#[derive(BorshDeserialize, BorshSerialize, PanicOnDefault)]
pub struct Contract {
    token: FungibleToken,
}
```

> 

Reviewer: I would add here how you initialize the map to make it clear that it uses a prefix.

```rust
// add a new account to the map
self.token.accounts.insert(&tmp_account_id, &0u128);

// remove one
self.token.accounts.remove(&tmp_account_id);

// reduce someone's balance
if let Some(new_balance) = balance.checked_sub(amount) {
    self.token.accounts.insert(account_id, &new_balance);
}
```

## Soroban

Soroban also has [an reference Fungible Token implementation](https://github.com/stellar/soroban-examples/tree/main/token).

`Identifier` is an account identifier, like a public key or account address.

```rust
use soroban_auth::Identifier;
use soroban_sdk::contracttype;

#[derive(Clone)]
#[contracttype]
pub enum DataKey {
    Balance(Identifier),
}
```

This is using [custom types](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/examples/custom-types), which the simple example didn't need. The full reference implementation includes several other variants on this enum.

Then, to use `DataKey`:

```rust
use soroban_sdk::{BigInt, Env};

/// Get an account's balance, defaulting to zero
pub fn read_balance(e: &Env, id: Identifier) -> BigInt {
    let key = DataKey::Balance(id);

>     if let Some(balance) = e.data().get(key) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    e.data().get(key).unwrap_or_default()
```

>     if let Some(balance) = e.data().get(key) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    e.data().get(key).unwrap_or_else(|| BigInt::zero(e))
```

>         balance.unwrap()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     } else {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>         BigInt::zero(e)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    }
}

/// Update an account's balance:
fn write_balance(e: &Env, id: Identifier, amount: BigInt) {
    let key = DataKey::Balance(id);
    e.data().set(key, amount);
}
```

As with the simple example, all data manipulations go through the [`e.data()`](https://docs.rs/soroban-sdk/0.2.1/soroban_sdk/data/struct.Data.html) interface.

> Like CosmWasm, and unlike NEAR, this avoids loading all data every time you need any data.

Reviewer: I'm confused by this statement. The following works with NEAR. Also another aspect where riffs make sure you only load the data you need.

```rust
struct Empty;

#[near_bindgen]
impl Empty {
  // Example static method
  pub fn skips_loading_state() -> String {
    "empty".to_owned()
  } 
}

```

Author: This post does not mention Riffs, since Riffs has not yet been finalized / announced. So I'm comparing what is common in NEAR.

And yes, you can export functions that don't read any state. But as soon as you include `&self`, it deserializes all state, right?

Author: ```suggestion
Like CosmWasm, and unlike NEAR, this avoids loading all contract state every time you need to access even just one field from your main contract struct.
```

I mostly like the feel of the [contracttype](https://docs.rs/soroban-sdk/0.2.1/soroban_sdk/attr.contracttype.html) macro, though it's a little bit harder to get a sense of the user-facing data than the NEAR approach. NEAR's `LookupMap` associates an account with a balance in a central place. In Soroban, if you just look at the file where `DataKey` is defined, you're not really sure what kinds of values will be associated with those keys. To figure that out, you need to look at how the keys are used. This makes the code a little bit harder to understand, gives poorer type-ahead documentation in your editor, and probably makes it easier to introduce bugs.

## CosmWasm

The CosmWasm core team also maintains a [reference fungible token implementation](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cw-plus/tree/main/contracts/cw20-base). Focusing on balance manipulation only:

```rust

> use cosmwasm_std::{Addr, Uint128};

Reviewer: What is the `Addr` type?

Author: An address. I'll add a note about it!

use cw_storage_plus::Map;

pub const BALANCES: Map<&Addr, Uint128> = Map::new("balance");
```

[`Map`](https://docs.rs/cw-storage-plus/1.0.0/cw_storage_plus/struct.Map.html) is similar to the `Item` that we saw before, but contains powerful interfaces for querying and managing a whole collection of information, kind of like NEAR's `collections` and `state` interfaces. You can also use compound keys with `Map`:

```rust
pub const ALLOWANCES: Map<(&Addr, &Addr), AllowanceResponse> = Map::new("allowance");
```

> This might be possible with NEAR collections, but I don't remember seeing it.

Reviewer: `prefix + first_key` --> collection with `second_prefix`. `second_prefix + second_key` --> data

> This might be possible with NEAR collections, but I don't remember seeing it.

Author: Could you show a code example?

> This might be possible with NEAR collections, but I don't remember seeing it.

Reviewer: https://docs.near.org/sdk/rust/contract-structure/nesting

> This might be possible with NEAR collections, but I don't remember seeing it.

Author: ```suggestion
You can achieve similar functionality in NEAR using [nested collections](https://docs.near.org/sdk/rust/contract-structure/nesting). This results in identical storage efficiency, but feels somewhat less ergonomic, in my opinion.
```

However, be careful with compound keys! It can get [tricky](https://github.com/Web3-Builders-Alliance/Cluster3CodeChallenge2.W22MTW.Chad/commit/eeb7cc013f97b31f12d42dbbbec568518d7da5e2) to get the order of those keys correct.

Manipulating these `Map`s looks similar to the simple CosmWasm `Item` manipulation that we looked at above. The biggest difference is the ability to query a [range](https://docs.rs/cw-storage-plus/1.0.0/cw_storage_plus/struct.Map.html#method.range):

```rust
// Build reverse map of allowances per spender
let data = ALLOWANCES
    .range(deps.storage, None, None, Ascending)
    .collect::<StdResult<Vec<_>>>()?;
```

# Summary

In this post we looked at how different Rust/Wasm-based chains provide hooks into similar underlying key-value stores.

Perhaps because it is the youngest, Soroban has the most straightforward implementation.

CosmWasm has the strongest opinions, and the most verbose syntax. It's also mature and powerful.

NEAR strikes a balance between the two, though it might feel a little too magical for some people.

> I don't find any  of these approaches particularly better or worse. And certainly, all of the teams maintaining these SDKs can learn from each other and steal features that provide better UX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I don't find any of these approaches particularly better or worse. And certainly, all of the teams maintaining these SDKs can learn from each other and steal features that provide better UX.
```
